Now you have two sets of results.
One for ablating the heads to a value of zero, and one for replacing them with the head average.
The goal of exercise five is to compare those two sets of results, and to try to address the question
of whether it matters.
If you replace the value of the head with zero or with an empirically observed characteristic.
You can make two plots for exercise five.
This first plot over here is for histograms corresponding to the change in softmax probability relative
to the clean model that's on the x axis.
For the targets and the non-targets, when you replaced each head with zeros versus with their mean,
now you can already see from the x axis that there's a pretty respectable range of Of numerical values.
So the two things you want to look for in this plot are, first of all, the target versus non-target
differences, which you already know are visually quite salient from the previous couple of exercises.
And the second thing to look for is differences between zero and mean replacements.
Of course, keep in mind we're not doing any statistical analyses here.
So this is really just about qualitative visual inspection.
Okay.
So these are the histograms on the left plot.
And then on the right you can make an image of the mean versus the zero replacement softmax probabilities
just for the target.
So I didn't plot the non-targets here.
Of course you could also add that image if you like.
Now, the reason why we are making this figure is to gain some insight into whether it matters whether
we replace the head values with zeros or the average.
Keep in mind that this is just one sample.
So one data sample one piece of text.
So we don't want to make any like really grand sweeping claims.
But with that caveat what would be your interpretation based on these results.
So that is part of your goal for this exercise.
I hope you enjoy making these plots and thinking about these plots.
And now you should pause the video and now I will switch to code.
Here is the grid spec code.
This is just for me to set up the figure, with the left plot being twice as long as the right plot.
Okay, so then I take histograms of basically everything that we have measured here and subtracting
off the clean version for the target and the non-target.
Okay.
And then a difference heatmap that is the results for mean minus the results for zero.
So here we see the histograms the distribution pretty interesting to look at.
Obviously the most notable.
The most striking difference here is between the non-targets and the targets.
So the non-targets change relative to their clean version very very very very little.
Right.
These distributions are really tightly clustered around zero.
And what does that mean.
That means that in this particular example, in this experiment that we've run, manipulating one head
at a time had almost no measurable impact on the token for the word France, whereas it had a huge impact
on the final logit for the word Germany.
And that is interesting because Germany is the correct answer.
France is the incorrect answer, but France and Germany are semantically very closely related.
So that's pretty interesting.
And then the second interesting thing to note here is that the distributions are not identical, but
really, really similar for the zero versus mean replacements within the targets.
You don't actually see this here, but they are also really similar for the mean and for the non-target.
So the red line and the green line are almost perfectly overlapping.
Okay.
Now this should not be that surprising.
The orange and the blue lines, the distributions for the final token logit probabilities are basically
equally affected.
Roughly equally affected whether we zero out the head or replace it with the mean.
And why is that not very surprising?
Well, we saw from the previous exercise that the actual means were pretty centered at zero and also
fairly small 0.05.
I mean, you know, these are quite small values.
So that tells us that the average within each head is already quite close to zero.
And so therefore replacing it with a literal zero.
It doesn't really have a huge impact here.
And that's also what you see in this image over here.
So I've scaled this to go from minus one to plus 1%.
Again it does have an impact whether we use zero or the mean.
And so just to be clear this image here is showing all the data points that go into these distributions
here.
So the difference between these distributions can be isolated to a particular head and layer.
And that's what I'm showing here.
It kind of looks like there's more of an impact in terms of the magnitude of the difference in earlier
layers and less in later layers, but again, that's a fairly subtle feature.
I wouldn't overinterpret that.
Exercises six and seven will take you very little time.
The idea is to make a very tiny change to the script, and then just run the entire script from the
beginning to the end to see qualitatively how the results change.
So the goal here in exercise six is very simple.
Instead of using France as the non-target token, use Germany.
Hey, wait a minute.
Isn't that the same as the target?
Well, to us humans it might be the same.
But notice the spacing.
The target here is actually space Germany and the non-target is no space Germany.
So just make that tiny change and then rerun the entire script from the top.
That's the easy part of the exercise.
The real part of this exercise is to understand why the results are the way they are, and what that
means about language models.
Okay, now you should run through this exercise and give it some thought.
And now I will switch to Python and discuss the results.
So here I'm just changing France to Germany again.
The spelling is identical.
The only difference is this one space in here, which we humans would basically just ignore.
But let's see what happens.
Okay, so now I'm going to run the entire code cell or code file again just by pressing this button.
And let's see.
The first plot we can look at is this one.
So again of course the log softmax probability.
The output logit is highest for space Germany.
This is incorrectly labeled.
This is not France.
This is now no space Germany.
You can see that the activation is relatively high compared to the distribution of tokens.
But it's it's not that high certainly not matching that of space Germany.
So that already gives us some indication that the model makes a really clear distinction between space
Germany and no space Germany.
Okay.
Let's see.
Now we can go down and look at this plot.
This looks qualitatively the same as when we used fronts for the non-target word.
Again, the suggestion here, the finding is that the model, when we manipulate these attention heads,
that is, changing the model's final logit output of the word space.
Germany, but not the word no space Germany.
Okay.
And then, yeah, the rest of this is basically just going to show us something similar.
Uh, and then yeah, here we also see the change relative to the clean version is so close to zero.
This is not technically all zeros.
There are some non-zero values here, but it just looks like a line at zero because yeah, the the impact
is so absolutely infinitesimal.
And why does this happen?
Why is this the case?
Well, let's go back and look at the text that we are actually pushing through the model.
So, uh, where is that text?
Uh, here it is.
Okay.
Berlin is the capital of what should be the next token in this sequence.
Well, it should be of of Germany like this.
But if you look at the, the Nontarget index, you're looking at this token over here.
What you're actually asking is what is the probability that the model is going to produce this token
as its next one.
And this has a really low probability of being generated.
Why?
Because this model has been trained on so much text data.
You know, it probably has happened that somewhere on the internet, at some point, someone accidentally
made a typo and wrote of Germany instead of of Germany.
Like this.
But the model basically knows that this is not a real word, and so it's not going to predict that no
space Germany should come after of.
Okay.
Now, if you like, what you can also try doing is running through the model again like this where you
actually include a space at the end of this text over here.
So far in this code challenge, and also in the previous video, we have been modifying a given head
for all of the tokens in a sequence that is advantageous when you're first getting started, because
it provides a nice and more robust assessment of the importance of that head for integrating information
from the entire sequence, from all the tokens that are available to each individual token.
But it is a little bit more precise to manipulate the attention activation vectors only for one particular
target token.
So what you should do here for exercise seven is, first of all, undo all the modifications from exercise
six so that you are at the state of where you are at the end of exercise five.
But then what you want to do here is modify the hook function so that you are replacing only the final
token in the sequence, and leave all of the other tokens in the sequence preserved.
And then you just rerun the entire script.
You don't need to do quantitative comparisons.
It's enough just to make sure that the code works in the first place.
And also if you notice any qualitative differences.
So now you can pause the video and get to work.
And now I'll do the thing that I always do after telling you to pause the video.
This manipulation is very simple.
You just have to remember the order of the dimensions in this tensor.
So this is sequences in the batch.
This is tokens.
This is heads and this is the head dimensionality.
So all we need to do is change that to that.
And then you have to change it to minus one again here.
So this is now only replacing the value in the very last token, and that means that all of the other
tokens in the sequence are left unpreserved.
And then I'm going to run through all of this code and then we can have a look.
And let's see.
So here we can look at this plot.
Uh we haven't done any manipulations here.
So this is just confirming that everything still works.
Okay.
And then uh, we can see this looks basically the same.
Uh, this result looks basically the same.
And these distributions look pretty similar.
The distributions are a little bit tighter here compared to when we used all of the heads, when we
ablated all of the heads.
Remember that distribution was a little bit more broad going into the negative values.
So overall uh zeroing out or replacing uh, the the head for all of the tokens in the sequence had a
bigger effect.
It was a more robust effect compared to only manipulating the final token, if you like.
You can also try rerunning this code again, changing different tokens.
For example, maybe you just want to modify the token corresponding to the word.
Where is this, uh, the word Berlin?
Okay, so that is although actually Berlin is too.
So if you want to manipulate just the, uh, heads for processing Berlin as the city, then you can
try changing that.
You can also try modifying just for the word capital.
So that would be this token here.
And maybe, you know, the model would, would get confused and think Berlin is the heart of EU for
example.
So that could be also a possibility.
One thing that you have already seen in this part of the course, which I'm now trying to explicitly
stress, is that there are several different terms for the same experimental manipulation.
Perhaps you find that frustrating and confusing.
In which case I share your frustration and confusion.
On the other hand, terminological issues are common in new areas of science, and they tend to converge
as the discipline develops.
The second point I want to make is more about the models themselves.
These are highly complex systems, and it's difficult to predict a priori what a tiny manipulation somewhere
in the model is going to have on all of the downstream calculations, especially considering all of
the nonlinear transformations.
So the particular question that we addressed here is whether it's more natural to replace with the average
value or with zero.
I'm not really sure that it matters considering how much effort models and the engineers who build them
expend to normalizing and shifting the data.
The weights and the activations so that they don't stray too far from zero.
I think what might be a more impactful aspect of the manipulation, beyond whether you set it to zero
or the existing average, is that in all of those manipulations that we've done here, we are completely
obliterating the variance in the head.
So all of the activation values in the head take exactly the same value after our manipulation.
So it might be that knocking out the variance is what's really driving the downstream impacts, and
not the actual value itself within some tolerance, because that constant value might just be shifted
in the next layer.
For example, in the layer norm before we get to the MLP subblock.
So yeah, it's really hard to predict these kinds of impacts.
Here I'm using the term deterministic chaos.
This comes from the complexity theory literature.
Deterministic chaos means that a very small change in a variable somewhere in a complex system can have
effects that are difficult or impossible to predict, but they can be measured, and if the system is
deterministic, or at least mostly deterministic, then the ensuing chaos and complexity can be perfectly
reproducible and therefore amenable to investigation.
And that is the case with these models, because the same tokens and the same manipulations will produce
the same internal dynamics within some threshold of machine numerical precision.
And that is great because that helps us investigate these systems.
Of course, there is randomness in the token selection at the end of the model, but at least within
one forward pass, and again within the tolerance of numerical precision, we have a deterministic chaotic
system.